<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-23" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h2>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">June 2, 18⁠—.<br/>
					<abbr class="eoc">Z.</abbr></p>
					<p>To his Excellency the Colonel and Commander of the ⸺⁠th Infantry Regiment from Ditz, Staff-Captain of the same regiment.</p>
					<p>
						<b>Report.</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>Herewith allow me respectfully to report to your Excellency that the duel between Lieutenant Nikoläiev and Sublieutenant Romashov took place today, according to the conditions settled by you on the 1st <abbr class="eoc">inst.</abbr></p>
				<p>The two adversaries met at 5:55 <abbr>a.m.</abbr> in the wood called “Oakwood,” situated three and a quarter versts beyond the town. The duel was decided in the space of one minute ten seconds, including the time for placing the parties and giving the signal. The places taken by the duellists were determined by lot. When the command “Forward” was given the fight began. As the two officers approached each other, a shot from Lieutenant Nikoläiev struck Sublieutenant Romashov high on the right side. After this Lieutenant Nikoläiev stopped to await his adversary’s bullet, but, after the lapse of half a minute, it was evident that Sublieutenant Romashov was not in a condition to return the shot, by reason of which Sublieutenant Romashov’s seconds declared the duel was ended, as to which other witnesses were agreed. Sublieutenant Romashov, on being carried to his carriage, fell into a deep swoon, and died in five minutes through internal hæmorrhage.</p>
				<p>The seconds on Lieutenant Nikoläiev’s side were the undersigned and Lieutenant Vasin; on Sublieutenant Romashov’s, Lieutenants Biek-Agamalov and Viätkin. The further arrangements for the duel were, by general agreement, made by me.</p>
				<p>A certificate from <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Znoiko is enclosed herein.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender"><span epub:type="z3998:signature">Ditz</span>,<br/>
					Staff-Captain.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
